[Intel GPU] Docs of XPUInductorQuantizer (#3293)
pytorch/tutorials: prototype_source/pt2e_quant_xpu_inductor.rst

PyTorch 2 Export Quantization with Intel GPU Backend through Inductor
==================================================================

> **Author**: `Yan Zhiwei <https://github.com/ZhiweiYan-96>`_, `Wang Eikan <https://github.com/EikanWang>`_, `Zhang, Liangang <https://github.com/liangan1>`_, `Liu River <https://github.com/riverliuintel>`_, `Cui Yifeng <https://github.com/CuiYifeng>`_

Reviewer: Please unify the style of names.

Author: thanks, modified

Prerequisites
---------------

-  `PyTorch 2 Export Post Training Quantization <https://pytorch.org/tutorials/prototype/pt2e_quant_ptq.html>`_

> -  `TorchInductor and torch.compile concepts in PyTorch <https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/torch_compile_tutorial.html>`_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-  `TorchInductor and torch.compile concepts in PyTorch <https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/torch_compile_tutorial.html>`_
- PyTorch 2.7 or later
```

Introduction
--------------

> This tutorial introduces XPUInductorQuantizer, which aims to serve quantized models for inference on Intel GPUs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This tutorial introduces ``XPUInductorQuantizer``, which aims to serve quantized models for inference on Intel GPUs.
```

> This tutorial introduces XPUInductorQuantizer aiming for serving the quantized model inference on Intel GPUs. The tutorial will cover how it 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This tutorial introduces XPUInductorQuantizer, which aims to serve quantized models for inference on Intel GPUs.
```

> It utilizes the PyTorch 2 Export Quantization flow and lowers the quantized model into the inductor.

Reviewer: Can we standardize capitalization of `Inductor`?

Author: thanks for reminding, has align the style now

> It utilizes the PyTorch 2 Export Quantization flow and lowers the quantized model into the inductor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``XPUInductorQuantizer`` use the PyTorch Export Quantization flow and lowers the quantized model into the inductor.
```

> utilizes PyTorch 2 Export Quantization flow and lowers the quantized model into the inductor.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
utilizes the PyTorch 2 Export Quantization flow and lowers the quantized model into the inductor.
```

> utilizes PyTorch 2 Export Quantization flow and lowers the quantized model into the inductor.

Reviewer 3: What are you trying to say in this phrase: "lowers the quantized model into the inductor"?

Author: It's the terminology in torch.compile

> The Pytorch 2 Export Quantization flow uses `torch.export` to capture the model into a graph and perform quantization transformations on top of the ATen graph.

Reviewer 2: Do we need to call it "PyTorch 2 Export Quantization flow" or can it be just "Export Quantization flow"?
```suggestion
The PyTorch 2 Export Quantization flow uses ``torch.export`` to capture the model into a graph and perform quantization transformations on top of the ATen graph.
```

Author: hi, @svekars , `PyTorch 2 Export` here should be a full description of `pt2e` in APIs like `prepare_pt2e, convert_pt2e`. Could we keep this just like x86InductorQuantizer here https://pytorch.org/tutorials/prototype/pt2e_quant_x86_inductor.html?

Reviewer 2: Sounds good!

> The pytorch 2 export quantization flow uses the torch.export to capture the model into a graph and perform quantization transformations on top of the ATen graph.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Pytorch 2 Export Quantization flow uses `torch.export` to capture the model into a graph and perform quantization transformations on top of the ATen graph.
```

This approach is expected to have significantly higher model coverage with better programmability and a simplified user experience.

> TorchInductor is the compiler backend that compiles the FX Graphs generated by TorchDynamo into optimized C++/Triton kernels.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TorchInductor  is a compiler backend that transforms FX Graphs generated by ``TorchDynamo`` into optimized C++/Triton kernels.
```

The quantization flow mainly includes three steps:

> - Step 1: Capture the FX Graph from the eager Model based on the `torch export mechanism <https://pytorch.org/docs/main/export.html>`_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Step 1: Capture the FX Graph from the eager model based on the [torch export mechanism] (https://pytorch.org/docs/main/export.html).
```

- Step 2: Apply the quantization flow based on the captured FX Graph, including defining the backend-specific quantizer, generating the prepared model with observers,
  performing the prepared model's calibration, and converting the prepared model into the quantized model.

> - Step 3: Lower the quantized model into inductor with the API ``torch.compile``, which would call triton kernels or oneDNN GEMM/Convolution kernels.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Step 3: Lower the quantized model into inductor with the API ``torch.compile``, which would call Triton kernels or oneDNN GEMM/Convolution kernels.
```

> - Step 3: Lower the quantized model into inductor with the API ``torch.compile``, which would call triton kernels or oneDNN GEMM/Conv kernels.

Reviewer 3: What does it mean to "Lower the quantized model into inductor"?

The high-level architecture of this flow could look like this:

> .. image:: ../_static/img/pt2e_quant_xpu_inductor.png

Reviewer: Please note that `Float Model`, `Example Input` and `XPUInductorQuantizer` is invisible in dark mode.

Author: thanks for reminding, the pictures is moidified

    :align: center

Post Training Quantization
----------------------------

> Static quantization is the only method we support currently.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Static quantization is the only method we currently support.
```

> The dependencies packages are recommended to be installed through Intel GPU channel as follows

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following dependencies are recommended to be installed through the Intel GPU channel:
```

::

    pip3 install torch torchvision torchaudio pytorch-triton-xpu --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/xpu

> Please note that since the inductor ``freeze`` feature does not turn on by default yet, run your example code with ``TORCHINDUCTOR_FREEZING=1``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please note that since the inductor ``freeze`` feature does not turn on by default yet, you must run your example code with ``TORCHINDUCTOR_FREEZING=1``.
```

We will start by performing the necessary imports, capturing the FX Graph from the eager module.

::

    import torch
    import torchvision.models as models
    from torch.ao.quantization.quantize_pt2e import prepare_pt2e, convert_pt2e
    import torch.ao.quantization.quantizer.xpu_inductor_quantizer as xpuiq
    from torch.ao.quantization.quantizer.xpu_inductor_quantizer import XPUInductorQuantizer
    from torch.export import export_for_training

    # Create the Eager Model
    model_name = "resnet18"
    model = models.__dict__[model_name](weights=models.ResNet18_Weights.DEFAULT)

    # Set the model to eval mode
    model = model.eval().to("xpu")

    # Create the data, using the dummy data here as an example
    traced_bs = 50
    x = torch.randn(traced_bs, 3, 224, 224, device="xpu").contiguous(memory_format=torch.channels_last)
    example_inputs = (x,)

    # Capture the FX Graph to be quantized
    with torch.no_grad():
        exported_model = export_for_training(
            model,
            example_inputs,
        ).module()

> Next, we will have the FX Module to be quantized.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Next, we will quantize the FX Module.
```

2. Apply Quantization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> After we capture the FX Module to be quantized, we will import the Backend Quantizer for Intel GPU and configure how to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After we capture the FX Module, we will import the Backend Quantizer for Intel GPU and configure it to
```

quantize the model.

::

    quantizer = XPUInductorQuantizer()
    quantizer.set_global(xpuiq.get_default_xpu_inductor_quantization_config())

> The default quantization configuration in ``XPUInductorQuantizer`` uses signed 8-bits for both activations and weights. The tensor is per-tensor quantized, while the weight is signed 8-bit per-channel quantized.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The default quantization configuration in ``XPUInductorQuantizer`` uses signed 8-bits for both activations and weights. The tensors are per-tensor quantized, whereas the weights are signed 8-bit per-channel quantized.
```

> Besides the default quant configuration (asymmetric quantized activation), we also support signed 8-bits symmetric quantized activation, which has the potential to provide better performance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In addition to the default quantization configuration using asymmetric quantized activation, signed 8-bit symmetric quantized activation is also supported, and can provide better performance.
```

::

    from torch.ao.quantization.observer import HistogramObserver, PerChannelMinMaxObserver
    from torch.ao.quantization.quantizer.quantizer import QuantizationSpec
    from torch.ao.quantization.quantizer.xnnpack_quantizer_utils import QuantizationConfig
    from typing import Any, Optional, TYPE_CHECKING
    if TYPE_CHECKING:
        from torch.ao.quantization.qconfig import _ObserverOrFakeQuantizeConstructor
    def get_xpu_inductor_symm_quantization_config():
        extra_args: dict[str, Any] = {"eps": 2**-12}
        act_observer_or_fake_quant_ctr = HistogramObserver
        act_quantization_spec = QuantizationSpec(
            dtype=torch.int8,
            quant_min=-128,
            quant_max=127,

>             qscheme=torch.per_tensor_symmetric,

Reviewer: Please consider whether we need more detailed annotations here to explain the meaning of these key parameters to users.

            is_dynamic=False,
            observer_or_fake_quant_ctr=act_observer_or_fake_quant_ctr.with_args(
                **extra_args
            ),
        )

        weight_observer_or_fake_quant_ctr: _ObserverOrFakeQuantizeConstructor = (
            PerChannelMinMaxObserver
        )

        weight_quantization_spec = QuantizationSpec(
            dtype=torch.int8,
            quant_min=-128,
            quant_max=127,

>             qscheme=torch.per_channel_symmetric,

Reviewer: Ditto.

Author: thanks, explanation is added.

            ch_axis=0,  # 0 corresponding to weight shape = (oc, ic, kh, kw) of conv
            is_dynamic=False,
            observer_or_fake_quant_ctr=weight_observer_or_fake_quant_ctr.with_args(
                **extra_args
            ),
        )

        bias_quantization_spec = None  # will use placeholder observer by default
        quantization_config = QuantizationConfig(
            act_quantization_spec,
            act_quantization_spec,
            weight_quantization_spec,
            bias_quantization_spec,
            False,
        )
        return quantization_config

> Then, we can set the quantization configuration to the quantizer.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Then, set the quantization configuration to the quantizer.
```

::

    quantizer = XPUInductorQuantizer()
    quantizer.set_global(get_xpu_inductor_symm_quantization_config())

> After we import the backend-specific Quantizer, we will prepare the model for post-training quantization.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After the backend-specific quantizer is imported, prepare the model for post-training quantization.
```

> ``prepare_pt2e`` folds BatchNorm operators into preceding Conv2d operators, and inserts observers in appropriate places in the model.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``prepare_pt2e`` folds BatchNorm operators into preceding Conv2d operators, and inserts observers into appropriate places in the model.
```

::

    prepared_model = prepare_pt2e(exported_model, quantizer)

> Now, we will calibrate the ``prepared_model`` after the observers are inserted in the model. This step is needed for static quantization only.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**(For static quantization only)** Calibrate the ``prepared_model`` after the observers are inserted into the model.
```

    quantizer.set_global(get_xpu_inductor_symm_quantization_config())

After the backend-specific quantizer is imported, prepare the model for post-training quantization.

> ``prepare_pt2e`` folds BatchNorm operators into preceding Conv2d operators, and inserts observers into appropriate places in the model.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``prepare_pt2e`` folds ``BatchNorm`` operators into preceding Conv2d operators, and inserts observers into appropriate places in the model.
```

    prepared_model(*example_inputs)

    # Alternatively: user can define the dataset to calibrate
    # def calibrate(model, data_loader):
    #     model.eval()
    #     with torch.no_grad():
    #         for image, target in data_loader:
    #             model(image)
    # calibrate(prepared_model, data_loader_test)  # run calibration on sample data

> Finally, we will convert the calibrated Model to a quantized Model. ``convert_pt2e`` takes a calibrated model and produces a quantized model.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, convert the calibrated model to a quantized model. ``convert_pt2e`` takes a calibrated model and produces a quantized model.
```

::

    converted_model = convert_pt2e(prepared_model)

> After these steps, we finished running the quantization flow and we will get the quantized model.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After these steps, the quantization flow has been completed and the quantized model is available.
```

3. Lower into Inductor
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> After we get the quantized model, we will further lower it to the inductor backend. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The quantized model will then be lowered into the inductor backend. 
```

::

    with torch.no_grad():
        optimized_model = torch.compile(converted_model)

        # Running some benchmark
        optimized_model(*example_inputs)

In a more advanced scenario, int8-mixed-bf16 quantization comes into play. In this instance,

> a Convolution or GEMM operator produces BFloat16 output data type instead of Float32 in the absence

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
a convolution or GEMM operator produces the output in BFloat16 instead of Float32 in the absence
```

::

    with torch.no_grad():
        optimized_model = torch.compile(converted_model)

        # Running some benchmark
        optimized_model(*example_inputs)

In a more advanced scenario, int8-mixed-bf16 quantization comes into play. In this instance,

> a convolution or GEMM operator produces the output in BFloat16 instead of Float32 in the absence

Author: Thanks for suggestion. We may keep this as here is a vanilla noun.

            # * The input data type is consistently defined as int8, attributable to the presence of a pair
            #    of quantization and dequantization nodes inserted at the input.
            # * The computation precision remains at int8.
            # * The output data type may vary, being either int8 or BFloat16, contingent on the presence
            #   of a pair of quantization and dequantization nodes at the output.
            # For non-quantizable pointwise operators, the data type will be inherited from the previous node,
            # potentially resulting in a data type of BFloat16 in this scenario.
            # For quantizable pointwise operators such as QMaxpool2D, it continues to operate with the int8
            # data type for both input and output.
            optimized_model = torch.compile(converted_model)

            # Running some benchmark
            optimized_model(*example_inputs)

> Put all these codes together, we will have the toy example code.

Reviewer 3: No need to have this sentence, just delete it.

Author: Thanks for advice, removed.

            # potentially resulting in a data type of BFloat16 in this scenario.
            # For quantizable pointwise operators such as QMaxpool2D, it continues to operate with the int8
            # data type for both input and output.
            optimized_model = torch.compile(converted_model)

            # Running some benchmark

>             optimized_model(*example_inputs)

Reviewer 2: Please write a conclusion for this tutorial. For example:

```suggestion
            optimized_model(*example_inputs)
            
 Conclusion
 -----------
 
 In this tutorial, we have learned how to utilize the ``XPUInductorQuantizer`` to perform post-training quantization on models for inference on Intel GPUs, leveraging PyTorch 2's Export Quantization flow. We covered the step-by-step process of capturing an FX Graph, applying quantization, and lowering the quantized model into the inductor backend using ``torch.compile``. Additionally, we explored the benefits of using int8-mixed-bf16 quantization for improved memory efficiency and potential performance gains, especially when using ``BFloat16`` autocast.
```

> Please note that since the Inductor ``freeze`` feature does not turn on by default yet, run your example code with ``TORCHINDUCTOR_FREEZING=1``.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps it might be better to put this near the top so developers are aware they need to run with this env variable set

Author: Thanks for suggestions, I moved to the top of example code section.

> PyTorch 2 Export Quantization with Intel GPU Backend through Inductor

Reviewer 4: Intel XPU

Author: ditto

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Export Quantization with Intel GPU Backend through Inductor
```

==================================================================

**Author**: `Yan Zhiwei <https://github.com/ZhiweiYan-96>`_, `Wang Eikan <https://github.com/EikanWang>`_, `Zhang, Liangang <https://github.com/liangan1>`_, `Liu River <https://github.com/riverliuintel>`_, `Cui Yifeng <https://github.com/CuiYifeng>`_

Prerequisites
---------------

-  `PyTorch 2 Export Post Training Quantization <https://pytorch.org/tutorials/prototype/pt2e_quant_ptq.html>`_
-  `TorchInductor and torch.compile concepts in PyTorch <https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/torch_compile_tutorial.html>`_

Introduction
--------------

This tutorial introduces XPUInductorQuantizer aiming for serving the quantized model inference on Intel GPUs. The tutorial will cover how it 
utilizes PyTorch 2 Export Quantization flow and lowers the quantized model into the inductor.

The pytorch 2 export quantization flow uses the torch.export to capture the model into a graph and perform quantization transformations on top of the ATen graph.

> This approach is expected to have significantly higher model coverage, better programmability, and a simplified UX.

Reviewer 4: This approach is expected to have significantly higher model coverage with better programmability and a simplified user experience.

Author: Thanks for suggestions, modified.

TorchInductor is the compiler backend that compiles the FX Graphs generated by TorchDynamo into optimized C++/Triton kernels.

The quantization flow mainly includes three steps:

- Step 1: Capture the FX Graph from the eager Model based on the `torch export mechanism <https://pytorch.org/docs/main/export.html>`_.

> - Step 2: Apply the Quantization flow based on the captured FX Graph, including defining the backend-specific quantizer, generating the prepared model with observers,

Reviewer 4: Apply the quantization flow based on the captured FX Graph, including defining the backend-specific quantizer, generating the prepared model with observers,

Author: Thanks for suggestions, has changed the description here.

  performing the prepared model's calibration, and converting the prepared model into the quantized model.
- Step 3: Lower the quantized model into inductor with the API ``torch.compile``. 

> During Step 3, the inductor would decide which kernels are dispatched into. There are two kinds of kernels the Intel GPU would obtain benefits, oneDNN kernels and triton kernels. `Intel oneAPI Deep Neural Network Library (oneDNN) <https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN>`_ contains 

Reviewer 4: If a end-user documentation, I think we could focus on PyTorch itself, and remove this section explanation.

Author: Thanks for suggestion, I removed the prolonged description over oneDNN and triton. Instead, I add a simple mention at `Step 3` above.

highly-optimized quantized Conv/GEMM kernels for both CPU and GPU. Furthermore, oneDNN supports extra operator fusion on these operators, like quantized linear with eltwise activation function(ReLU) and binary operation(add, inplace sum).
Besides oneDNN kernels, triton would be responsible for generating kernels on our GPUs, like operators `quantize` and `dequantize`. The triton kernels are optimized by `Intel XPU Backend for Triton <https://github.com/intel/intel-xpu-backend-for-triton>`_

The high-level architecture of this flow could look like this:

.. image:: ../_static/img/pt2e_quant_xpu_inductor.png
    :align: center

Post Training Quantization
----------------------------

> Static quantization is the only method we support currently. QAT and dynamic quantization will be available in later versions.

Reviewer 4: remove the further ready context from current introduction - "QAT and dynamic quantization will be available in later versions."

Author: Thanks for suggestion, removed.

The dependencies packages are recommended to be installed through Intel GPU channel as follows

::

>     pip install torchvision pytorch-triton-xpu --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/nightly/xpu

Reviewer 4: Let's use standard "pip install torch torchvision torchaudio", not separate internal commands to highlight the internal dependencies command.

Author: Lets keep using our own channels, since torchvision is customized on XPU, we need let user could run example in this successfully. Synced with @jingxu10  let's us `pip3 install torch torchvision torchaudio pytorch-triton-xpu --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/xpu`, instead of `nightly` wheel.

This approach is expected to have significantly higher model coverage, better programmability, and a simplified UX.
TorchInductor is the compiler backend that compiles the FX Graphs generated by TorchDynamo into optimized C++/Triton kernels.

The quantization flow mainly includes three steps:

- Step 1: Capture the FX Graph from the eager Model based on the `torch export mechanism <https://pytorch.org/docs/main/export.html>`_.
- Step 2: Apply the Quantization flow based on the captured FX Graph, including defining the backend-specific quantizer, generating the prepared model with observers,
  performing the prepared model's calibration or quantization-aware training, and converting the prepared model into the quantized model.
- Step 3: Lower the quantized model into inductor with the API ``torch.compile``. 

During Step 3, the inductor would decide which kernels are dispatched into. There are two kinds of kernels the Intel GPU would obtain benefits, oneDNN kernels and triton kernels. `Intel oneAPI Deep Neural Network Library (oneDNN) <https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN>` contains 

> highly-optimized quantized Cong/GEMM kernels for both CPU and GPU. Furthermore, oneDNN supports extra operator fusion on these operators, like quantized linear with eltwise activation function(ReLU) and binary operation(add, inplace sum).

Reviewer: A typo.
```suggestion
highly-optimized quantized Conv/GEMM kernels for both CPU and GPU. Furthermore, oneDNN supports extra operator fusion on these operators, like quantized linear with eltwise activation function(ReLU) and binary operation(add, inplace sum).
```

Author: fixed, thanks for suggestions.

                **extra_args
            ),
        )

        weight_observer_or_fake_quant_ctr: _ObserverOrFakeQuantizeConstructor = (
            PerChannelMinMaxObserver
        )

        weight_quantization_spec = QuantizationSpec(
            dtype=torch.int8,
            quant_min=-128,
            quant_max=127,
            qscheme=torch.per_channel_symmetric,
            ch_axis=0,  # 0 corresponding to weight shape = (oc, ic, kh, kw) of conv
            is_dynamic=False,
            observer_or_fake_quant_ctr=weight_observer_or_fake_quant_ctr.with_args(
                **extra_args
            ),
        )

        bias_quantization_spec = None  # will use placeholder observer by default
        quantization_config = QuantizationConfig(
            act_quantization_spec,
            act_quantization_spec,
            weight_quantization_spec,
            bias_quantization_spec,
            False,
        )
        return quantization_config

Then, we can set the quantization configuration to the quantizer.

::
    quantizer = XPUInductorQuantizer()
    quantizer.set_global(get_xpu_inductor_symm_quantization_config())

> 

Reviewer: The code format has not taken effect.

Author: thanks for reminding, added the fix.
